Read The Docs
=============

[Read The Docs](https://rtfd.org) (RTD) publishes documentation from
open source projects on the web. For our projects that are in git
repositories and use Sphinx for their documentation, it\'s often as
simple as a few clicks to publish a new project\'s documentation.

Accounts
--------

Either use the Caktus RTD account (credentials are shared in LastPass),
or a client account if the client prefers.

Linking to GitHub?
------------------

If the project\'s repository is public, you can publish it without
giving RTD any access to your GitHub account.

Adding a project
----------------

Go to the [RTD dashboard](https://readthedocs.org/dashboard/) and click
the \"Import a Project\" button.

If the RTD account is linked to any GitHub, Bitbucket, etc accounts,
then RTD will helpfully list the repositories it has access to that way,
and you can click on one of them.

In any case, you can click \"Import Manually\" and enter a name and
repository URL for the project.

Versions/Branches
-----------------

You can control which branches of your project RTD builds and publishes
the documentation for. RTD calls these Versions. Go to your project\'s
Admin area (look for the button with the gear and the word \"Admin\"),
click Versions in the left-hand navigation, and select the branches you
want to build and deselect the ones you don\'t.

Private projects?
-----------------

You can link the RTD account to GitHub accounts (or Bitbucket, etc) to
let it access the source of a private project, but RTD can\'t really
protect the built documentation from unwanted access.

According to the RTD [privacy
controls](http://docs.readthedocs.org/en/latest/privacy.html), you can
set a level of \"private\", but it just hides the project from lists and
searches. Anyone with the URL can still view the documentation. You will
need to decide case-by-case whether this is good enough for your
project.

I don\'t know a solution as simple as RTD for hosting access-controlled
documentation. Please update this documentation if you find any.

In any case, you can always build your doc and then put the files under
`_build/html` onto a static file web server with whatever access
controls you like.
