Amazon Web Services (AWS) {#aws}
=========================

We often deploy to Amazon Web Services. Here are some tips on getting
started.

AWS Accounts vs. IAM Users
--------------------------

With AWS, we need to be careful to distinguish *AWS accounts* from *IAM
users*.

*AWS Accounts* are connected to billing, and to visibility and access to
resources. Caktus has an AWS account. Some of our clients have their own
AWS accounts that we might use when working for those clients, so that
they get billed directly for the resources used instead of us.

*IAM Users* are created within accounts to let administrators \"log
into\" those accounts and access those resources. IAM Users within one
account are unrelated to IAM users in any other account. If I have IAM
users named \"johndoe\" in two different AWS accounts, they are
completely separate and different, having nothing to do with each other.

For you to do things in the Caktus AWS account, someone will have to
create an *IAM user* for you within that AWS account, and give it the
privileges for what you need to do.

Root users vs. IAM users
------------------------

Just to confuse things, *AWS accounts* each have a *root user*, which is
not an IAM user within that AWS account, but a user in the global Amazon
system of users - the same set of users that can buy things on Amazon\'s
shopping sites, in fact. To create a new AWS account, you have to log in
as one of this type of user.

Logging in
----------

To login using a *root user*, start at <https://console.aws.amazon.com>.
If you find you\'re already logged in, log out and go to that page
again. Then click the link below the login form - it currently says
`Sign-in using root account credentials`.

You can tell you\'re logging in as one of these type of users because
the login page will only prompt for a username and password.

To login using an *IAM user* in a particular account, you need to go to
another page. These login pages prompt for *three* things: *account*,
username, and password, so you can tell them apart from the \"root\"
user login page.

Unfortunately, finding a page to login as an *IAM user* can be tricky.
The simplest way is this: each AWS account has a unique URL that will
let you login to that AWS account. Anyone who is already logged in as an
*IAM user* on the account can find the URL (I think) by going to the
[main \*IAM\* page](https://console.aws.amazon.com/iam/home) in the AWS
console. Near the top they should see something like this:

    IAM users sign-in link:
    https://caktus.signin.aws.amazon.com/console

Bookmarking that link will let you sign into that AWS account using an
IAM user. When you follow that link, you *will* be redirected, and the
resulting URL does *not* work directly to log you into that account, so
you cannot just find the signin page once and bookmark it, you have to
track down that original URL.

Anyway, using that link will take you to a three-field login page with
the *Account* field already correctly filled in. Add the username and
password and you will find yourself logged into the AWS console.

If you know the account identifier, you can change the account field on
this login page to login to another account, but not all account
identifiers are as memorable as \"caktus\", some are just long random
strings of numbers, so bookmarking the canonical login URL seems
easiest.

Subaccounts
-----------

If that wasn\'t complicated enough, if you need to work in an AWS
*subaccount*, there are more steps.

Hopefully someone has given you a link to use for accessing the
subaccount. That link will not let you log in directly, though. First
you need to login normally to the main account. Only after you\'ve done
that can you use the link, which should then switch you \"into\" that
subaccount. While you\'re switched, you\'ll only see resources of that
subaccount, not of the parent account.

You can confirm how you\'re currently logged in by looking near the top
right in the console. When I\'m logged in to the main Caktus account, I
see a dropdown \"<dpoirier@caktus>\". Once I switch roles to a
subaccount, I see only the display name for the subaccount. Clicking
that dropdown displays full details of how I\'m logged in, along with a
\"back to dpoirier\" link to exit the subaccount and go back to the main
account.

AWS Console
-----------

The AWS Console is the web interface to all the AWS services. It can be
overwhelming. Here are some tips for navigating around.

First - you need to know which AWS service you need to work with. For
example, suppose you need to create a new virtual machine. That AWS
service is called \"EC2\". In the AWS console, click the orange cube
that appears in the top left of every page, and you\'ll end up at a
directory of AWS services. It\'s also overwhelming :-), but if you
don\'t spot EC2 right away, you can search in the browser page for it.
When you find it, click it, and you\'ll be in the part of the AWS
console where you can manage EC2.

*Unfortunately*, not everything we think of as an AWS service is listed
on that directory page (believe it or not). For example, quite a few
services are managed within the EC2 part of the AWS console - such as
Security Groups, Elastic Load Balancers, Elastic IPs, Autoscaling
Groups, etc. You can see them listed down the left side of the EC2
interface.

So, if you don\'t see the service you want on the main directory of
services, try within the EC2 part of the console.

Regions
-------

Another important concept to understand from the beginning is the *AWS
Region*. You can think of an AWS Region as a geographic location where
Amazon has a bunch of data centers. There are regions with names like
\"US East (N. Virginia)\", \"EU (Ireland)\", \"EU (Frankfurt)\", etc.

With most AWS services, you can create and use resources in any region
you like, but to manage them, you first have to select one region using
the dropdown near the top right of every page. Once you\'ve selected a
region, you will only see resources from that region, and new resources
you create will be created in that region, until you select a different
region.

Tip: You can have multiple browser tabs/windows open to the AWS console
with different regions selected, if that helps on really big projects to
keep an eye on everything. But usually you won\'t have to do that.

We typically try to create resources in a region closest to the majority
of the site\'s users. If we can\'t pick a region that way, we usually
end up in \"US East (N. Virginia)\" just because it seems to be the
default.

::: {.warning}
::: {.admonition-title}
Warning
:::

Not every service is available in every region. Before you start setting
up a great big infrastructure in some region, it\'s a good idea to
verify that all the services you will need are available there. You
don\'t want the services that make up your site to have to communicate
between regions if you can help it.
:::
